## Let's talk about DNS

**DNS** stand for the **Domain Naming System** and it's a critical system of any Networking and Server operations. Without DNS our internet will cease to exist, or really it will be really complicated. I'm sure you've used the internet many. Think about how you use the internet, you navigate to a website like **www.google.com** or **www.microsoft.com** or even, **www.learn.microsoft.com**. Using these names we can easily navigate to the website of our choice. This is prehaps the most popular way we can see DNS being used. 

## Explaining DNS

Before we get further into DNS, let's take a step back and think a bit more about networking. Let's say for example, you just went to the computer store and you purchase a new laptop. You turn it and you start to use it. You create a document that contains all the necessary information for your house. The address, where the main breaker is, where the main water-valve is and who to contact when something breaks. A very handy document indeed. Now let's say your spouse, roommate or your parents wants a copy of this document on their own computer and you need to transfer the document over to them. There are many ways to transfer a file but let's say that you need to utilize your network to transfer the document over. How do you do this? In networking you will need a few things before you begin your transfer. 

First you need to ensure that both of your computers are in the same network and you do that by assigning them each a unqiue IP address. An IP address is used to identity your device within a network. You can relate this to a phone number, let's say you and your friend has the exact same phone number, and someone calls. Would that call go to you or your friend? It's hard to say right. It will definiitely complicates things. Since with IP address you want ever device within your network to have it's own IP address to ensure only devices that needs to receive certain information can get it. Now let's say the IP of your computer is 192.168.1.2 and the subnet mask is 255.255.255.0. You might not know much about network but know this, if you ever see a subnet mask with the numbers: 255.255.255.0 this means that you're allowed to use 254 different IP addresses within your network. So for example if my IP address is 192.168.1.2, this means that my router or gateway's IP address could be 192.168.1.1 or something different. but notice the first both IP address have these numbers in common: 192.168.1 and only the last number is different 1 and 2. So one IP address can be 192.168.1.1 and another one could be 192.168.1.2, another one can be 192.168.1.3 and we can go all the way up to 192.168.1.254. If you're asking why we can't use 192.168.1.0 and 192.168.1.255. These are special IP address within any network. The first 192.168.1.0 is called a Network Address because it signifies where the network begins and the last IP address 192.168.1.255 is called the broadcast address. I won't get too much into more Networking since it's a huge topic to cover, but know know that our network ranges from 192.168.1.1 to 192.168.1.254 and any network device within these ranges are part of the same Network. 

Now that we have a little basic understanding of how IP addresses work, we need to ensure that both of your computer and the destination computer are in the same network and we can do this by assigning each device a Unique IP address. Since we are in the network 192.168.1.0 with a 255.255.255.0 subnet mask. We know that we can have 254 different IP address. So we can assign my computer the IP address 192.168.1.10 and my destination computer could be 192.168.1.11 with both subnet mask being 255.255.255.0. Once these numbers are set we can say that both of our computers are in the same network.

The second thing we need to ensure is that they can talk to each. Yes they both have the IP address but how will they communicate with each other. We can do this by using a network cable to connect them to each other, that is one end of a cable into your computer and the other end is plugged into the destination computer. You can also connect them together using network switch. 

As long as you have the IP address configured and the computers connected by some kind of medium like a cable. Those computers should be able to talk to each and begin transferring data to one another. 

Okay but what does all of this have to do with DNS? You might be thinking. Well see how we wanted to transfer data we needed to identify our computers by using IP address? And all you needed to know was the other computer's IP address to transfer the data. Well if you have 2 computers this is great but what will happen if you have over 500 different systems that you need to be able to transfer data back and forth? Our little 192.168.1.0/24 network can only handle 254 different network devices. And even then, to be able to remember all those different IP addresses would be choatic. This is where DNS comes in to make like easier. Instead of having to remember each IP address we can just remember a name. John-pc is much easier to remember that 192.168.1.46. And if you're using a DHCP service to handle out your IP Address that 192.168.1.46 that's assigned to John-pc could change and another computer could be assigned to 192.168.1.46 IP address. 